This video is brought to you by Squarespace,
from websites and online stores to marketing tools and analytics.
Squarespace is the all in one platforms builds a beautiful online presence and
run your business.
Check out Squarespace through the link of the description below more about them
in a bit, and let's get into it.
Cornelius, Vanderbilt.
Wasn't exactly what you would expect out of one of the richest men in the world.
He was brutish, ill mannered, barely literate and swore like a sailor,
but perhaps it was the same traits that made him the definition of the American
dream with all the good and the bad that that entailed.
He rose up from nothing from the less than nothing. In fact,
his Dutch ancestors came to the new world as indenture servants,
but through hard work and a Kenai towards the future,
Hees a fortune seldom scene. Before at that time, that being said,
he certainly was no saints,
like all the other industrialists and speculators of his time.
Vanderbilt stepped on plenty of toes to make money.
He was ruthless in business and didn't come to be regarded as America's first,
Robert Barron for nothing
Cornelius Vanderbilt was born on may the 27th, 1794 in Staton island,
New York city to Cornelius Vanderbilt, senior and Phoebe hands.
His ancestors had come to north America 150 years before he was born back.
When the territory was still part of a Dutch colony called new Netherlands.
His great,
great greatgrandfather was a man named Jan Sen who immigrated to America as an
indenture servant. By the time Cornelius was born,
his family station had improved to bit, not by very much.
His parents were farmers and to supplement their income.
His father also operated a ferry that transported people and goods across the
New York Harbor young uncle NES had a very strong work ethic ever since he was a
boy. He labeled on the farm from an early age. And when he was 11 years old,
he dropped out of school to work full time.
Although clearly things would work out of him.
His lack of a formal education would haunt Vanderbilt for the rest of his life.
Even in his later years,
he struggled to write English fluently meant he was in the habit of spelling out
words, phonetically.
It was part of the reason why he could never find acceptance within the ranks of
the wealthy elite. And he was always regarded as a Boish outsider.
Cornelius Vanderbilt might be remembered as a railroad tycoon,
but it wasn't trains that made him his first fortune,
but rather ships his road to success started when he began helping his father
with his ferry service. He learned the business and by the time he was 16,
Vanderbilt was ready to branch out on his own.
He borrowed a hundred dollars from his parents to buy his own ship.
A two mastered sailing vessel called Perga in.
He paid them back by splitting the profits with them,
Vanderbilt faced stiff competition,
but his strategy was to undercut everyone else by offering cheap fares for
transport between Staton island and Manhattan. That being said,
he was also an extremely hard worker and he constantly reinvested in his
business by acquiring more ships,
Vanderbilt quickly built up a reputation as a reliable and assiduous ferryman.
In fact, even though he was still just a young man,
he earns the nickname of the Commodor a Mo, which he eagerly,
embraced and used for the rest of his life. Thanks to his good standing.
Vanderbilt earns an important government act in 1812,
when war broke out between the United States and the United Kingdom,
and he was supplying the forts and ferrying soldiers around New York Harbor.
This period of conflict proved quite prosperous for Cornelius Vanderbilt on the
personal fronts in 1813, he also married his first wife,
cousin named Sophia Johnson. They would go on to have 13 children together,
although they did not have a happy marriage by all accounts,
Vanderbilt was not a very caring father or husband.
It had often been rumors that he regularly cheated on Sophia with prostitutes
and even had, uh, committed to an insane asylum. At one time,
even though he was steadily,
amasing a small fortune as he was building up his fleet in 1817,
then Vanderbilt was offered a position.
He couldn't refuse that of Steamboat captain for years,
the Commodor had developed an interest in steam powered ships as he considered
them superior to sailing vessels and the way of the future. Moreover,
the offer came from Thomas Gibbons, the former mayor of Savanna Georgia,
and one of the wealthiest merchants around Vander assumed command of the
Steamboat mouse and started ferrying people between New York and New Jersey
while simultaneously maintaining control of his growing business. However,
he soon discovered that the Steamboat trade in New York was run by a monopoly
granted by the New York state legislature to,
to men Robert Livingston and influential New York politician and to one of the
founding fathers and Robert Fulton,
the man credited with inventing the first commercially viable Steamboat.
They were both dead by 1817, but their,
he still had a vice grip on the monopoly and they had granted a license to run
steamboats on the Hudson river to former New Jersey Senator and governor Aaron
Ogden. This whole thing,
still audited from a personal rivalry between Gibbons and Ogden. At first,
the former tried to bankrupt the latter by undercuting his prices eventually
Ogden sued and the matter went to court where it actually resulted in a very
important landmark ruling in the cases of Gibbons and Ogden from 1824,
the Supreme court concluded that the commerce clause in the cons,
which granted the federal government,
the power to decide how interstate commerce was conducted also extended to
waterway navigation.
Therefore the state of New York had no right to grant a monopoly in the first
place. And the court ruled in favor of Gibbons to support his employer.
Vanderbilt had his own case against Ogden, even hiring Daniel Webster,
that noted state to argue his case before the Supreme court. However,
it was never heard as it was unnecessary after the ruling in the previous case,
even so Vanderbilt deserves no credit as some sort of pioneering tress.
He only fought the monopoly because it worked against him in the future.
He would've no problem using them to his advantage.
In 1826, Thomas Gibbons died believing his business in the hands of his son,
William Cornelius,
Vanderbilt considered the wealthy merchant as son on what a meant to him,
but he didn't like William and he considered him weak.
He stayed on for a few more years until he got his finances in order.
But Vanderbilt left the business in 1828 and broke off on his own. Again,
he even bought his own Steamboat 145 ton,
106 foot side Wheeler called the citizen.
This vessel was quickly followed by others in the next few years.
As we previously mentioned,
Vanil regularly took the profits he made and reinvested back into his business
steadily building a fleet of steamboats and opening new roots for his ferries,
such as the long island sound, Albany Connecticut's and Providence. Of course,
he faced competitions in all the new areas he expanded to,
but these companies found out quickly that it was dangerous to go up against
the Commodor.
He was absolutely ruthless when it came to business because he had a wealth of
resources, his go-to strategy involved undercutting his opponents prices,
oftentimes to the points where they would either go bankrupt or be forced to
sell to him.
In the cases of some companies that also had deep pockets would often pay
Vanderbilt,
large sums of money to leave the area and take his ferries on another route.
One notable example was when the Commodor wanted to put his ships on the Hudson
river, traveling between New York city and Albany.
This route was dominated by a monopoly called the Hudson river Steamboat
association, but Vanderbilt only saw it as a challenge.
This was at a time when I,
Andrew Jackson was running a populist presidential campaign based around the
common man.
He had gained popularity by portraying himself as a man of the people fighting
the corrupt aristocracy. Vanderbilt did the same thing. It wasn't ours.
After all he did come from a working class family and his behavior in demeanor
was certainly more at home in a bar than not a banquet.
He dub his ferry service,
the people's line and offered cheap rates that working men could afford.
Unsurprisingly, this strategy worked rather well. And soon enough,
the Steamboat association offered him a hundred thousand dollars to leave the
Hudson river, plus another $5,000 a year to stay away
For years,
Vanderbilt focused his business mainly in the region between Boston and
New York,
but he organized a major expansion in 1849 prompted by the California
gold rush. He knew that hundreds of thousands,
even millions of people would be traveling that way.
Many of them looking to settle permanently in the organized California
territory,
which at this point was still lobbying stated when California finally became a
state in 1850 demand for transportation between the east and west coast
skyrocketed. And all of a sudden a new multi-million dollar venture was born.
Unsurprisingly,
Vanderbilt wanted a piece of that pie and started sending steamships along this
route. Back then,
the only way to travel from New York to San Francisco by water was to round Cape
horn. The Southern tip of south America. However,
this trip was long and time meant money.
It was still quicker and less dangerous than traveling Overland across the
United States. But Vanderbilt sought out a way to speed up the journey.
Even more. The solution was a canal across Nicaragua.
It would've shaved days off.
Every single trip Vanderbilt even founded the accessory transit company or ATC
whose purpose was to secure transportation across the, from American country.
However, for various political and economic reasons,
the project never went into construction.
And eventually it was established that a canal across Panama would be more
efficient. That being said, the ATC was not a failed venture. Find the opposite.
In fact,
Vanderbilt may not have been able to secure a route that took passengers from
the east coast to the west coast on a single trip,
but he developed a course that was a mix of land and water travel.
His customers would bought a Steamboat in New York,
which would take them to the Eastern coast of Nicaragua. From there,
the goods and passengers were loaded onto smaller vessels capable of going up
the San Juan river and crossing lake Nicaragua. When they reached lands,
they traveled by stage coach to the Western coast where they boarded a different
steamer headed for San Francisco.
It was the fastest and cheapest way of reaching the east coast and it made
Vanderbilt a nice bundle of money,
but he didn't get everything that he had aimed for what the Commodor wanted was
a big fat government contract to also transport mail.
But it went instead to one of his competitive who founded the Pacific male
steamship company and the United States male steamship company, even.
So the Commodor still had an ACE up his sleeve, his,
his opponents used a route across Panama. It was similar but longer.
So Vanderbilt went back to its tried and true method of slashing his prices to
steal all of his competitions clear and tell it worked as gold rush fever
started to die down. The Commodor saw no reason to keep this rude.
So he accepted a large monthly step end from his opponents to close down the
ATC.
Now you might not be building a canal across Panama or indeed NICAR arguer in
order to transport mail, but maybe you've got an idea for a different business.
And that brings me to today's sponsor square space, two simple things.
Maybe you've got that idea.
Maybe it's for a business or a website or a YouTube channel podcast,
something like that. It's kind of knocking around in your mind. And number two,
the only way to figure out if that idea is worth doing is to get it out there to
the world.
And I know that can be daunting because it's scary to go and do new things,
but not knowing how to set up a website is not an excuse because there are no
excuses available with Squarespace.
Squarespace allows you to create a powerful website for whatever you're up to.
You wanna sell something online? Yes.
Easy to do that with Squarespace or you wanna start a podcast? Absolutely.
What about a YouTube channel? Well, you gonna do that on YouTube obviously,
but you'll on a website to go along with it.
It all starts on Squarespace with a beautiful template that you can customize
your heart's content,
or you can start from scratch or you can easily move over from an existing
domain. Don't start from scratch though. Like I say,
don't make any excuses and just get started with one of those beautiful
templates. And after you've done all of that, after you've got set up,
there's no no updates. There's no patches.
There's no tech nonsense that you have to deal with.
Squarespace also handles all the websitey stuff. Like I say, podcasts,
they have mailing lists. Of course, social media integrations. Absolutely.
So look, just go get started now head to squarespace.com for a free trial.
And when you're ready to launch go to squarespace.com/biographics and you'll all
save to 10% off your first purchase of a website or a domain,
and let's get back to it.
While Vanil was expanding his operations to the west coast.
He also started offering trans-Atlantic journeys to Europe. Again,
this venture proved profitable,
but the Commodor also learns that not even he was infallible as before his
new route had competition, the British QAR steamship line among others.
Vanil tried to squash it like he always did, but he failed.
The British government was keen to see the company succeed against American and
German firms.
So they provided a low in interest loan plus a generous annual subsidy to ensure
that ARD line had the capital to both build top of the line ships and to compete
with Vanderbilt's undercuting tactics.
Another unexpected setback occurred in 1853 when Vanderbilt saw fit
for the first time ever to take a vacation,
he was almost 60 years old and had been working for most of his life.
So the Commodor decided that if he was to go on holiday,
he would do it in style.
Vanderbilt bought a giants luxurious yacht that he dubbed the north star and he
took his whole family on a grand tour of Europe at a total cost of around half a
million dollars while he was vacationing. The Commodor left.
The management of ATC in Nicarag were in the hands of two men,
Charles Morgan and Cornelius Garrison in came another and called William Walker,
who was a filibuster,
which back then meant that he was a sort of insert who would rally troops to
invade parts of Latin America,
take them over by force and set up English speaking colonies.
There were a few filibusters during the 19th century as manifest destiny was
still a big thing,
but Walker was probably the most famous of the all because he actually exceeded
twice.
Well sort of first in 1853 Walker and dozens of his followers invaded Mexico
and actually conquered the Baja California territory by assaulting its capital
of LaPaz and capturing the governor.
He then declared the Republic of lower California sovereign state with him as
presidents. Of course,
this didn't last long as Walker and his men ran out of supplies.
Desertions became frequent.
And he also had to relocate his headquarters several times because the Mexican
army was just a little bit upset with him in the end. He had no choice,
but to cross the border and surrender to an American army,
he was arrested and charged with an illegal war,
but was actually acquitted after giving an impasioned speech that swayed the
jury,
all Walker learns from this experience was that he needed better financing in
1855.
He was ready to try again this time Nicaragua while the Commodor was still on
his extended vacation,
Walker approached Morgan and Garrison and in exchange for their support of his
co. He pro was that once he was the new president,
he would revoke ATCs charter and issue a new one in their name.
And that's exactly what happened in 1856.
William Walker became the new president of the Republic of Nicaragua and a new
transit business owned by Morgan and Garrison had exclusive rights to operate in
the country. Understandably Vanderbilt was furious when he,
he learns about their treachery. According to an apocryphal story,
he wrote them a short and ominous letter where he said, gentlemen,
you have undertaken to cheat me. I won't Sue you for the law is too slow.
I'll ruin you yours, truly Cornelius Vanderbilt.
And that is pretty much what he did.
He set up another trans company that passed through Panama with dirt cheap
prices to steal their customers. He refused to take any passengers to,
or from Nicaragua and convinced the nearby central American countries to not
recognize walkers government back in the United States.
He sued Morgan and Garrison in a legal battle.
The American media dubbed the war of the Commodor and most decisively.
He sent agents into Nicaragua to cause chaos and convinced the locals to
rebel against Walker. It worked and in 1857,
the filibuster surrendered to the us army. Again,
meanwhile Morgan and Garrison's business went bankrupt and Vanderbilt assumed
control over the regions transit system. Again, as far as Walker was concerned,
he, once again was acquitted as many Americans garden him as a hero,
he then went and tried the same thing in hons, but things went day,
little different that time the hon authorities captured him. And in 1860,
they executed him by firing squad.
The 1860s were a troubling time for Cornelius Vanil as they were for most
Americans because of the civil war on a personal level, he suffered losses,
his youngest and favorite son, George Washington,
Vanderbilt died in the war after contracting malaria and ate misogynist.
The Commodor never showed much attention to his daughters and he considered his
other two sons to beat disappointments. One of them Cornelius,
Jeremiah was a gambler who was on bad terms with his father. After the elder,
Cornelius locked him up in a lunatic asylum. The other one, William Henry,
the Commodor simply regarded as weak and good for nothing.
Eventually Vanderbilt changed his tune about William after he took a poor farm
in Staton island and made it profitable since then Vanderbilt integrated his son
more and more into his business.
And even it was William who inherited most of his father's estate in 1868
Vanderbilt's wife, Sophia died after her passing.
The Commodor began visiting mediums, particularly the Clain sisters.
He fell in love with the younger sibling,
Tennessee Clain and according to some sources, even proposed marriage,
this worried his family who were concerned that Vanderbilt might leave his
fortune to a stranger.
So they played cupids and fixed him up with a distant cousin who was four
decades younger than him.
This cousin had an unusual name for a woman as she was called Frank Armstrong.
We're not exactly sure why,
but at least one historian asserts that this was due to a misguided promise from
her parents due close friends to name their first child, Frank,
even if it wasn't boy, anyway,
Cornelius and Frank eloped in Canada in 1869,
as far as the Claplan sisters were concerned,
they soon gave up their spiritualist ways and became noted suffragists with
Vanderbilt's backing they more out into the business world and became the first
women to open a brokerage firm on wall street.
The older sister dropped the Clain from her name and soon became known as
Victoria.
Woodhole the first ever female candidate for the presidency of the United
States. Going back to the civil war,
this period represented a huge shift in Vanderbilt's business practices,
no longer impressed with the K abilities of steamboats.
He now looked to the railroad as the future truth be told the Commodor had shown
interest in trains for decades. It might have invested in them even sooner,
if not for his involvement in one of the first fatal train accidents in American
history, all the way back in 1833,
the Heightstown rail accident occurred in New Jersey.
When a carriage caught fire caused an axle to break and derailed.
The train one person was killed and dozens were injured among them was Cornelius
Vanderbilt who broke his leg in the crash in the decades. Following the event,
the Commodor had only minor dealings with the rail industry.
He occasionally bought shares in new railroads,
but most of his efforts were concentrated in Nicaragua.
Eventually though he could no longer ignore the potential for huge profits
offered by this new mode of transportation starting in the late 1950s,
he began selling off his fleet of ships during the civil war,
even donated his most prized vessel,
the appropriately named Vanderbilt to the union Navy to use against the
Confederates who dominated the seas with the help of that.
Ironclads Vanderbilts even acted as an advisor when it came to all things
maritime, but he refused an official position in Lincoln's cabinet,
as he wanted to avoid politics at any cost.
The Commodor wasn't very interested in building the railroads.
He preferred to buy ones that already existed in the former monopoly.
His first major purchase was the New York and Harlem railroad. At the time,
it wasn't considered particularly valuable there's it only ran trains for part
of the journey before connecting to horse drawn carriages. However,
it had prime position as the only railway that entered downtown Manhattan,
Vanderbilt brought in hiss son,
William as vice president of the Harlem line and together they soon made it
profitable.
Next up he took control of the Hudson river railroad in 1864 in the New York
central railroad in 80 67,
he also bought smaller adjacent lines to consolidate them all into one giant
railroad empire.
Vanderbilt was already 70 years old when he decided to get into railroads,
he took a backseat role and mostly delegated orders to William and other
subordinates.
Although he did enjoy taking inspection trips to overseers domains,
it seemed that his ruthlessness had subsided somewhat with age, very rarely,
whether any through tactics to get his way more often than nor Vanderbilt
preferred, simply to buy enough stock in a railroad until he became the majority
shareholder and then appoint himself as president.
He even dabbled in philanthropy,
donating a million dollars to establish the Vanderbilt university in Nashville,
Tennessee. The last major addition to the Vanderbilt empire occurred in 1876,
when the TA acquired the Canada Southern railway. Soon after that,
the 82 year old Commodor felt gravely his death.
It was slow and painful being bedridden for before passing away on
January the fourth, 1877,
he remains a cantankerous grumpy mal content until the very end on his better
days, he would curse out his physicians and throw water bottles at them.
On one occasion,
he had to be physically restrained after trying to attack the media men who were
keeping watch outside of his house to report on his death de build's death was
followed by a long, messy lawsuit over his assets,
not wanting to split up his fortune. He left around 90 million of his a hundred,
5 million estate to his son,
William while Frank and the rest of his children received much smaller amounts
in cash or stock ands in case he were wondering that fortune means well over
200 billion in model currency. So I really hope you found that video.
Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below and do not forget to subscribe.
Please also check out the fantastic sponsor for this episode square space,
who I'm linking to below. And thank you for watching.
I.